# Programming Assignment 2: Greedy Algorithms

Jordan Price (UFID 77967971) \
Collin Williams (UFID 73358805)

## Compiling

There is only one source file, `main.cpp`, which can be compiled
with your C++ compiler of choice. Its only dependencies are
within the standard library. I used C++17 to compile it, but earlier
versions might work as well. A `CMakeLists.txt` has also been provided.

## Executing

After compiling the program, you can run it by passing a file path
as the first command line argument.

ex. `AlgorithmAssignment2.exe ".\examples\example1.in"`

## Assumptions

The input & output format matches the format provided in the assignment instructions.

## Question 1: Empirical Comparison

| Input File | k | m | FIFO | LRU | OPTFF |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| test4.txt | 4 | 60 | 4 | 4 | 4 |
| test5.txt | 3 | 60 | 60 | 60 | 48 |
| test8.txt | 3 | 60 | 57 | 57 | 36 |
| test10.txt | 4 | 60 | 36 | 17 | 17 |
| test11.txt | 3 | 60 | 45 | 50 | 31 |

**Does OPTFF have the fewest misses?** \
Yes, in all tests, OPTFF has either the fewest misses or is tied for the fewest misses.

**How does FIFO compare to LRU?** \
Depending on the request pattern, FIFO and LRU can perform differently. `test4.txt` shows them having the same low miss count, `test5.txt` and `test8.txt` show them having the same high miss count, then `test10.txt` shows LRU outperforming FIFO and tying OPTFF, and `test11.txt` shows FIFO outperforming LRU.

## Question 2: Bad Sequence for LRU or FIFO

Sequences can be made in which OPTFF has strictly fewer misses than LRU and than FIFO.
From Question 1, for test files 5, 8, and 11, OPTFF outperforms both FIFO and LRU. Then for test file 10, OPTFF outperforms FIFO but ties with LRU.

**test5.txt**
```
3 60
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
```
FIFO: 60 misses \
LRU: 60 misses \
OPTFF: 48 misses

**test8.txt**
```
3 60
1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 7 8 1 2 3 9 10
1 2 3 11 12 1 2 3 13 14 1 2 3 15 16 1 2 3
17 18 1 2 3 19 20 1 2 3 21 22 1 2 3 23 24
1 2 3 25 26 1 2 3 27 28 1 2 3
```
FIFO: 57 misses \
LRU: 57 misses \
OPTFF: 36 misses

**test10.txt**
```
4 60
1 2 3 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 6 1 2 3 7 1 2 3 8 1 2 3 9
1 2 3 10 1 2 3 11 1 2 3 12 1 2 3 13 1 2 3 14 1 2 3 15
1 2 3 16 1 2 3 17 1 2 3 18 1 2 3
```
FIFO: 36 misses \
LRU: 17 misses \
OPTFF: 17 misses

**test11.txt**
```
3 60
1 2 3 4 1 2 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 1 2 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 1 2 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 1 2 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 1 2 5 1 2 3 4 5
```
FIFO: 45 misses \
LRU: 50 misses \
OPTFF: 31 misses

## Question 3: Prove OPTFF is Optimal

Let A be the optimal sequence of actions for a given request sequence. Assume that A is more optimal than OPTFF, i.e. it has fewer cache misses. Let `i` be the first step where A and OPTFF take different actions, and let `d` be the item requested from the cache. We can assume `d` is not in the cache, because otherwise both caches would simply return `d`, resulting in the same behavior. Thus, both caches must evict an item. We can also assume that if A evicts `a` and OPTFF evicts `b`, then `a` ≠ `b`, since we assumed A and OPTFF took different actions at this step. 

We will use an exchange argument to show that modifying A to evict `b` instead of `a` will not result in any additional cache miss. Let A’ denote the modified version of A. Let `j` be the first step after `i` where any of the following happen: `a` is requested, `b` is requested, or `b` is evicted by A. \
**Case 1, `b` is requested first:** This will never happen. Since OPTFF chose to evict `b` instead of `a`, `a` must be requested before `b`. \
**Case 2, `a` is requested first:** `a` is not in cache A, but is in A’. If A evicts `b` at step `j`, then A and A’ now have the same cache. If not, we make A’ replace its evicted item with `b`. In either case, A and A’ now also have the same cache. This did not result in an additional eviction, and A = A’ for the remaining sequence. \
**Case 3, `b` is evicted by A:** Make A’ evict `a`. This did not result in an additional eviction, and A = A’ for the remaining sequence. \
**Case 4, the remaining sequences are already equal:** Nothing needs to be done.

We have described a procedure to transform A into OPTFF without increasing the number of cache misses. By contradiction, there cannot exist a sequence with fewer cache misses than the one generated by OPTFF.
